the White Swan and the red pen
this series of chits is focused largely
on science and how it works
it's about how if you think that it is
possible to accumulate evidence for a
theory
then a red pen is evidence in favor of
the claim that all swans are white
how is this so
and Brett aren't you one of those people
who keeps on going on about how you
cannot have evidence for a theory anyway
well yes yes I am
but let's understand the reasons against
this claim at an even deeper level than
I usually go on about
it's not enough to know that
falsification works that the existence
of one Black Swan refutes all swans are
white
you have to also know why the
alternative perspective which is almost
universally subscribed outside of what
is called critical rationalism is false
it needs to somehow become a deep part
of your thinking that positive evidence
just isn't a thing and it never can be
which is to say you cannot have evidence
for a theory evidence that supports a
theory or makes it more likely to be
true and so on
that is not only unnecessary
but it's actually absurd
so let's see why momentarily
but let me first recap why it's
unnecessary
once you have an explanation of the
evidence
then it no longer cries out for support
because there are no alternative
theories there is just the one the
explanation but okay imagine you're in
the rare position of having two good
explanations well then if you do find
yourself in that rare position of having
two or more good explanations then the
function of evidence is to decide
between those theories already guessed
when evidence does this it also happens
to serve the simultaneous purpose of
becoming the so-called explicandom
technically speaking in other words the
thing to be explained
the explanation is there to explain the
evidence
the evidence is there to decide between
explanations
okay so all of that means evidence in
support of a theory is unnecessary
but why is it also absurd
we're going to take a little lesson in
logic here
consider if you like the claim all swans
are white
so often held up as The Pedestrian
example of either how falsification
works you know you find the unexpected a
Black Swan in other words or maybe these
days a translucent one would be more
unexpected
or the old swans a white thing is a way
of teasing out exactly what Bayesian
epistemology is trying to get at
how many swans need to be observed
before we can say it's probably the case
that all swans are white or likely
what's the threshold
and once you do employ Bayes theorem by
the way that almost never happens what
is called bayesianism Never much
involves Bayes theorem actually being
deployed
well you say you update your initial
prior probability in light of more white
swans to 85 confidence that all swans
are white
well then you can conclude with
something less than certainty that all
swans have white
of course how certain you are that the
85 percent number you've come up with is
a hundred percent correct no one can say
but let us put aside all of those
concerns about how many swans need to be
observed before concluding all swans are
white
put aside that no finite list of
observations like seeing a thousand
white swans or a million swans
can ever logically be equivalent to a
universal Claim about all swans or all
anythings
and let us even put aside science is not
about making claims like all swans are
white in the first place it's about
explaining the world
let us put all that aside
the idea that one can have evidence in
support of the theory or claim like all
swans are white by finding ever more
white swans is logically equivalent to
my looking on my desk and seeing any
random thing there like a red pen as
also evidence in support of all swans
are white
if that seems absurd to you it is
but this is one of the counter-intuitive
things about logic and one of the Absurd
consequences of the evidence can support
a theory account of how science
functions
it is a problem for that idea but not a
problem for falsification or explanation
what on Earth am I talking about
what I'm talking about is
the red pen on my desk is a non-white
non-swan
all swans are white is logically
equivalent to all non-white things are
not swans
in formal logic this is known as the
contrapositive
so given this logical fact about reality
anything at all in the universe you can
point to that is not a swan and isn't
White
is evidence in favor of all swans are
white if you think there is such a thing
as evidence in favor of or support of
any claim at all
so on the inductivist or Bayesian
account of things every time you observe
non-white non-swans basically everything
in the universe your confidence in your
theory about the truth of all swans are
white should increase
precisely because it amounts to being
evidence in support of your theory
do you see how absurd the inductive
account of science is
of bayesianism of non-explanatory
falsifiable conjectural scientific
knowledge
Alternatives would have it that
absolutely everything everywhere all the
time counts as evidence in favor of your
theory
or at least almost everything does
science does not consist of claims like
all swans are white
it consists of explanations
evidence cannot be used to support a
theory it serves only to decide between
explanations already guessed
no amount of gathering more evidence
about the world allows us to extrapolate
General truths about it
what we have are problems that's where
we begin
our ideas at times fail to account for
what is out there in the world
in science to resolve this Clash of
ideas between what we think and what we
observe well then we have to use our
imaginations to conjecture guess gets
into existence a new and better
explanation
once we've done that once we can explain
the problematic observation we have a
solution
and once we have that there's no need to
further support it because well it's all
we've got it's the solution
it's the good explanation
this series of chits is also now a blog
post on my websites
I give credit to a lecturer of mine who
first posed the question to a class I
was taking in formal philosophical logic
at the time he held Aloft a red
whiteboard marker and said how is this
fair in evidence in favor of the claim
that all swarms are white
it took me until the bus ride home to
figure out what the answer was and I was
excited to come to the next lecture and
give the answer but I was beaten to the
punch by a whole bunch of other people
who threw their hands up immediately as
well
and of course they did it was a class of
logic students
the problem with fallibilism
this series of chits is associated with
an article which I'm linking to here
because it provides a whole bunch of
links that are referred to throughout
this series of chits
the problem with fallibalism
is that it is not well understood
well there I've said it so why bother
going on with anything more in this
piece
well I want to attempt to understand why
exactly this simple idea is so
deceptively simple and therefore easily
mistaken for something else
moreover many who claim to be
fallibleists of some kind often turn out
to be dogmatists of Another Kind which
means they never were thorough going
fallibleists to begin with
I don't like labels I'd prefer they not
be applied to people and instead
reserved for ideas as a matter of
convenience
people are not defined by their ideas
but rather the capacity to create them
in the first place
labels tend to negate whatever else a
person might say on the topic once you
think they are a rationalist of some
kind for example
even the bright and cheery Optimist
label has become a little clicky of late
but more importantly it too is often too
easily misunderstood
I endorse optimism in David Deutsche
Center the word
that's what I prefer to say rather than
answering too I'm an optimist like some
yellow peeled cultist with a big silly
grin
but fallibleist well they don't much
mind admitting I might be wrong
and to be accused of such is never an
insult even about fallibalism and will
come to that
so you can call me fallible
I don't much go in for those pilled
things though I've already mentioned
yellow pilled I don't know if it's
already a thing yellow appealed but if
fallibleism was to be pilled I guess
it'd be pink
is pink a color
is it it's not on the rainbow it's
negative green as some physicists have
joked for example in this video
pink is a kind of mysterious color
is it a boy's color or a girl's color at
one point it was certainly regarded as a
boy's color or at least it was
considered masculine anyway now of
course it's a girl's color although with
what we can only call the 2020s gender
Wars that were now in the midst of the
meaning of pink is once again up in the
air so if a really Butch masculine man
thinks a pink shirt is a just divine
is he or isn't he you know what I mean
it's all questions
get pink pilled
become a fallibleist
I Tweet now and again that one way to
think about fallibleism is simply the
stance that
it is always possible to be wrong
because there is something to be wrong
about
very few people are thorough going
fallible listens even fewer than that
recognize fallibleism in others
the issue is that most people are either
dogmatists at least about something or
other or relativists increasingly and
sometimes even the same people on other
issues
dogmatism is the misconception that
there exists something usually many
things for a dogmatist
about which it is impossible to be
mistaken
what is often held Aloft are things like
one plus one equals two
or Pythagoras Theorem or everything in
mathematics much of science
or of course in a conversation with a
sufficiently Adept fallibalist the
dogmatist will Retreat like George
Custer to the philosophical equivalent
of Little Bighorn River
I think I exist
Descartes conjuta their last stand
they think these dogmatists
that because they think they are
entitled to assert that it is absolutely
certain beyond all doubt and impossible
to be mistaken that at least on this
point that they exist that therefore
there is something about which you are
not fallible
they can't imagine how it could be
otherwise and so their lack of
imagination on this point is somehow
proof in their minds of Truth
but why is it important for people to be
absolutely certain they are in
possession of a final truth
is it simply knowing something enough
isn't simply knowing you exist enough
but Brett why does the distinction
matter anyway who cares about the
difference between knowing and
possessing certain truth
it matters for two reasons and very
deeply
one dogmatism everywhere is dangerous
and as popper admonished the doctrine
that the truth is Manifest is the root
of all tyranny
and two
because only fallibleism always allows
the possibility of infinite progress via
continuous error correction
admitting you can always be wrong even
about fallibalism
means that there is always more left to
learn and understand
when it comes to Descartes I think
therefore I am
or even just I exist as being a
statement indeed a logical proposition
so they think that one can utter as some
kind of necessary truth about which one
cannot possibly be mistaken
it can be difficult for many people most
people indeed to doubt this
they desire a foundation and following
Rene Descartes they think well this is
it the foundation
I am certain I exist
but a fallibalist needs no such
Foundation they can pursue instead
conjectural knowledge on this I agree
with Descartes I exist
I can say that honestly there's no
problem here I can even add rather
unnecessarily
I know I exist
that's enough for me
so rather than say it cannot possibly be
false that I exist or even I am certain
I exist
I just say
I know I exist or even
I exist
just not infallibly because I'm not
invaluable about anything ever including
I exist
I can always improve my understanding of
I exist and correct errors in what I
think about it
I might not know right now how to
improve it but that's true of almost
everything I know so there's nothing
special about that particular claim
and much of what we know like I exist
contains in explicit content as well
like what the word exist means or what I
refers to and so on and on and on
much about any claim when you dig deep
is inexplicit indeed an infinite amount
of inexplicit content lies there in an
infinite potential well of inexplicit
possibility
this infinite depth of the possibility
for further understanding underscores
the possibility of progress
the possibility for improvement
optimism
I cannot say how it might be possible
that I exist just might be false but
this my failure of imagination on that
point is no proof that it might
nevertheless be false
I am a fallible human there are many
things I might be unable to imagine
now having said all of this especially
saying all of this clearly and indeed
coherently and even sometimes
passionately
then the criticism comes
well you sound terribly dogmatic Brett
which of course comes down to tone
or not even tone but rather
perceived tone
it's rather like homophobia one doesn't
actually need to be homosexual to
experience homophobia
one only has to be
perceived to be homosexual and so too
with dogmatism the thorough going
fallibleist holds the position that all
dogmatism is wrong and is then accused
of Defending a Dogma about how all
dogmatism is wrong
but that is simply a misconception to do
with playing word games and trying to
hold the fallibles to the meanings of
terms and explanations that the
dogmatists insist on
when I say look
this is how it is fallibleism is the
only reasonable stance to take
people think this is somehow
self-refuting
indeed any time one explains any Theory
at all like Mata is made of atoms or I
know that evolution by natural selection
explains the diversity of species or the
Big Bang happened
people throw accusations of dogmatism
around
I know we people are Universal
explainers
that really gets people's backs up
especially in these times around
discussions of AGI and AI
you can't know that you're a dogmatist
you're refusing to consider the
alternative
that's the accusations that come at you
think and fast when you try and explain
this position about Universal explainers
let us Linger on this related point just
for a moment
those who object to the claim people can
understand anything in principle are
arguing for a kind of anti-human
alternative that human beings cannot
even in principle understand some things
and yet I like everyone else in history
has been steeped in that lesson that
lesson being that people human beings
are rather pathetic creatures and we
understand they're very little and we
never will understand very much about
this universe we're just incapable of it
I know that argument well here let me
make the case
firstly our memories are limited
because our brains are finite
there are certain things we just cannot
comprehend
you Brett don't even understand the
Korean language and yet you claim to
have tried
if you're a universal explainer find the
success or Theory to Quantum Theory
right now
see you can't
therefore you're not a universal
explainer I've just told you two things
you cannot understand or you cannot do
you bread are just dogmatically
committed to a certain kind of Faith
Claim about Universal explainers
but all of that is just to ignore the
explanation offered elsewhere about all
of this such as in this video here
I know the retorts in the objections it
takes time to appreciate the power of
universality
what a deep shift in perspective it
takes to appreciate this relationship
between what a person is
how they explain and understand by
generating models in their mind of
anything else in physical reality and
that physical reality itself
how as David Deutsch explained it in his
Ted talk about chemical scum the one
structure comes to resemble the other
the mind and whatever else in physical
reality exists that it is trying to
explain
but if one does explain all that and
says that's just the way it is baby
because that is what we know and we know
that because it literally follows from
our rational understanding of the world
namely because we reject the
supernatural
then the accusations of dogmatism begin
to flow
stating
it just is the case that X
we know X and we know X because our best
explanation of science quantum theory
implies X
or our best theory of epistemology
implies X conjectural knowledge growth
implies X
none of that is dogmatic
all of those claims might be false for a
fallibilist that goes without saying
of course when you do say that as a
fallibleist then the criticism
immediately flips a moment ago the
interlocutor accusing you of dogmatism
now says oh so you think nothing is
actually true
relativist
this is the experience of the
fallibilist stating as clearly as
possible what we know and making the
case with passion and curiosity and dare
ones say fun and excitement
only to have that mistake and for
dogmatism
at no point during what I sometimes call
my tirades on my podcast
which in Truth uh really just monologues
summaries of explanations about exciting
parts of Science and philosophy
at no point do I ever presume it's not
possible that I'm wrong
I could always be wrong
but how tedious would that be to add
that caveat after every single claim
that I make
this might be wrong I could be mistaken
and as I say
having just made the exciting case for
some bit of science or philosophy and
being accused of dogmatism and so adding
the caveat no no no no I could always be
wrong about all of this because of the
universal fallibility of the process of
knowledge creation then you get accused
of relativism
or this is because the only frame many
have is either you're certain of certain
truths in other words dogmatic in some
sense as they are
or you're untethered to these
foundational truths of reality entirely
and so therefore you're a relativist
so this is the problem with fallibalism
it's very poorly understood it steps
outside that frame
but misunderstanding fallibleism should
be expected because we're all fallible
all is a woven web of guesses